# Qute Internationalization Plugin (@qutejs/i18n)

**`@qutejs/i18n`** is a small plugin based on [polyglot](https://airbnb.io/polyglot.js/) which provides internationalization to Qute components.

**Note** that the plugin is using **Promise** API so you need to include a **promise polyfill** for older browsers (or to include `@qutejs/polyfill` which is including a `Promise` polyfill too).

## Usage

```javascript
import Qute from '@qutejs/runtime';
import QuteIntl from '@qutejs/i18n';

var i18n = new QuteIntl({
	resources: {
		en: {
			hello: 'Hello World!'
		},
		fr: {
			hello: 'Bonjour monde!'
		},
		ro: '/remote/messages-ro.json'
	}
});
i18n.load('en').then(function() {
	// phrases loaded -> ready to translate
	// you can mount your application now
})
```

Then you can use the translate method `t()` from a Qute component template:

```xml
<div>{{t('hello')}}</div>
```

After instantiating `Qute.Intl` the instance is also available as the  `Qute.i18n` property.

You can access the polyglot instance through the `polyglot` property on the Qute.Intl instance. Also the Qute.Intl instance is exposing `polyglot.t()` as the `t()` method.

## Configuration

The configuration object passed to the `Qute.Intl()` should define the available languages and phrases through the `resources` property. Also, the constructor may contains options to be passed to `polyglot` constructor.

The resources object is mapping a language name to a phrases in the JSON format supported by `polyglot`. You can also map a language to a string. In that case the string should be a valid URL or absolute path from where the JSON resource will be fetched.

Before starting to use translations you must define a target language. This is done using the `load(lang)` method. The method take as argujment the language to use and return a **promise**, which you can use to be notified when the language is ready to be used.

If you don't pass a language to the `load()` method (or if you use the special value `guess`) then the browser language will be used: `i18n.load('guess')` or `i18n.load()`.

The `load()` method can also be used to switch to another language. When changing the language you can refresh the user interface using the `refresh` method of the root component.

## Example

```jsq
import Qute from '@qutejs/runtime';
import QuteIntl from '@qutejs/i18n';

<q:template name='RootTemplate'>
	<div>
		<div>
		<button @click='useLang("en")'>English</button>
		<button @click='useLang("fr")'>French</button>
		</div>
		<div style='padding: 10px 4px'>{{t('hello')}}</div>
	</div>
</q:template>

var i18n = new QuteIntl({
	resources: {
		en: {
			hello: 'Hello World!'
		},
		fr: '/assets/messages-fr.json'
	}
});

i18n.load('en');

export default Qute(RootTemplate, {
	useLang(lang) {
		var self = this;
		i18n.load(lang).then(function(changed) {
			if (changed) {
				console.log('language changed -> updating');
				self.refresh();
			}
		});
	}
});
```


